---
title: Mick Foreman's Story
draft: false
tags:
---
*Copied from the North Family Reunion Booklet (1989)*

*By Mick Foreman*

My mother was [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Mrs Faull]], who lived in Palmerston North with her four small children, [[FAULL, (1896) Elizabeth (Gladys)|Gladys]], [[FAULL, (1893) William Thomas "Billy"|Bill]], [[FAULL, (1894) Henry James "Harry"|Harry]] and [[FAULL, (1898) Marel Emily "Alma"|Alma]]. When her [[FAULL, (1870) William|husband]] died she moved to Eltham where her two sisters lived. Here she met my [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|father]] who was a hairdresser. They married and moved to Kaponga where he owned a Hairdressing and Billiard Salon. Their first child was a daughter named [[FOREMAN, (1902) Olive Annie|Olive]], 15 months later a son named [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Edward]] (later to be well known as Mick) then later another daughter, [[FOREMAN, (1906) Helen Doreen "Nellie"|Nellie]] - after [[FOREMAN, (1906) Helen Doreen "Nellie"|Nellie]] another son called [[FOREMAN, (1908) Christopher Raymond "Ray"|Ray]], and finally another daughter named [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Dorothy]]. With her four previous children we all lived together as one happy family.

Then came the war, 1914-1918. [[FAULL, (1893) William Thomas "Billy"|Bill]] and [[FAULL, (1894) Henry James "Harry"|Harry]], together with [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Mum's]] brothers [[FORD, (1888) William Alexander "Bill"|Bill]] and [[FORD, (1890) Frederick Thomas "Fred"|Fred]], went to the war, out of which only [[FORD, (1890) Frederick Thomas "Fred"|Uncle Fred]] returned, the others are buried in France. During September 1918, [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Dad]] had a stroke, unable to move or speak, dying in November. [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Dad]] thought as much of [[FAULL, (1893) William Thomas "Billy"|Bill]] and [[FAULL, (1894) Henry James "Harry"|Harry]] as of we boys and was hard hit by their deaths, never fully recovering.

We stayed on at Kaponga for another year, when the family, with the exception of me, moved to Dannevirke where [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Mum]] had purchased Arcadia Tearooms. I stayed on at Kaponga for a further year, working for Mr Betts in his garage. [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Mum]] didn't like me being away from home and so she arranged a job for me in Dannevirke in a garage and once again the family were together. How long we had the tearooms I can't recall, but besides my garage job I was also operator at the Town Hall pictures. Later I was operator at the Acadia Theatre in Wairoa. I didn't like it there so applied for and received the position of operator at Queen's Theatre, Cuba Street, Wellington, and while there I stayed with [[FOREMAN, (1862) Eliza Kate "Kitty"|Aunty Kate]]. Meanwhile Mum had sold the tearooms and moved to a house in Victoria Avenue, where she kept boarders. From there she once more went into business, this time buying a large private hotel which we named Ranfurly House. By then [[FAULL, (1896) Elizabeth (Gladys)|Gladys]] and [[FAULL, (1898) Marel Emily "Alma"|Alma]] were married, and [[FOREMAN, (1902) Olive Annie|Olive]] and [[FOREMAN, (1906) Helen Doreen "Nellie"|Nellie]] later. In the meantime I had moved to Tauranga and took over a theatre, which after two years failed so I went to Auckland. A few months later I went to work in a garage in Palmerston North and from there back to the Acadia in Dannevirke just at the time when talkies were coming in. [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Mum]] sold Ranfurly House and she and [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Dos]] moved to Wellington to live. I meanwhile had board with people named Cornwall, whose [[CORNWALL, (1907) Iona Keitha|daughter]] I later married.