---
title: The Cleverley Connection
draft: false
tags:
---
*Copied from the North Family Reunion Booklet (1989)*

*By Diana Ryan*

I am not too sure about [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth Ford's]] early life. My [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|grandmother]] came to live with us when my [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|father]] went away to WW2 and one of my deepest regrets is that I didn't talk to her about the old days. She was born in Christchurch on 24th May, 1874 and at some stage her parents moved to Rawhitiroa, just out of Eltham, where her [[FORD, Henry James|father]] had a brick kiln. Her first husband, [[FAULL, (1870) William|Mr Faull]], is a bit of a mystery, it's rumoured that he was a drinker, but [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] must have been only 17 or 18 when she married him. I'm not sure where the couple lived but [[FAULL, (1898) Marel Emily "Alma"|Alma]] was born in Palmerston North. After her [[FAULL, (1870) William|husband's]] death, [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] moved back to Eltham and helped out at a boarding house run by her sisters Pat[^1] and Eva. [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward Foreman]] had a hairdressing salon in Eltham and presumably boarded at the Ford sisters' establishment. All three sisters were striking looking women and one can imagine there were plenty of suitors, even for [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] who was burdened with four young children. It is said that the family were outraged by [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward's]] decision to marry [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] whom they regarded as a scheming young widow! Looking at their wedding photo it is easy to see why he fell in love with her. She had a lovely nature too. Certainly I can never remember a harsh or critical word from her about anyone in all the years she was with us. Despite a sad and very hard life she remained a fine looking woman to the last, with a gentle nature and not an ounce of bitterness in her soul.

[[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]] took his young bride (at 27 she was 14 years younger than [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]]) to Kaponga where he had his business, and [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]], as well as bearing five children, ran a boarding house for travellers called "The Coffee Palace". The family was a very close knit one with [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]] being as fond of his stepchildren as the five that came later. One thing I can remember is that [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma]] often told me what a perfect gentleman he was. Neither [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] nor [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]] were in the habit of gossiping or criticising anyone, so the one time [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Mick]] heard his father speak harshly about a customer, is branded in his mind. [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]] came through from the salon one day during the war in an agitated state. He told [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] that while he was shaving a certain gentleman, the man told him that the war could go forever for all he cared as he was making a good profit out of it. [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]] remarked to [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] that it was the first time he had felt like cutting someone's throat. [[FAULL, (1894) Henry James "Harry"|Harry Faull]] had fallen at the Somme in 1916, [[FAULL, (1893) William Thomas "Billy"|William]] was lost at Passendale in 1917, and [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] had lost her brother [[FORD, (1888) William Alexander "Bill"|Bill]] as well, so one can understand [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward's]] rage. He was very fond of both boys and their deaths probably contributed to the heart attack he had in 1918. He never spoke a word after he was struck down and was nursed by [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] until he died in November 1918. [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Mick]] remembers it was the day the Turks pulled out of the war because the family was called in from celebrating in the streets. The 'flu was raging at the time so special arrangements had to be made to bury [[FOREMAN, (1861) Edward Burr|Edward]], a story [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Mick]] can tell. Of the older children, all were good looking, especially [[FAULL, (1898) Marel Emily "Alma"|Alma]] who was beautiful and had her mother's lovely nature and was a real "little mother" to the younger children. My mother [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Dorothy]], told me that [[FOREMAN, (1908) Christopher Raymond "Ray"|Ray]] was the apple of his mother's eye, and could do no wrong. Perhaps he reminded her of one of her dead boys. The years between 1916 - 1918 must have been traumatic for [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] who lost two sons, a brother and her husband. [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] who was a magnificent cook (I can still remember her oxtail stews!) cooked meals for the nurses tending the ill and dying, during the 'flu epidemic. [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Mick]] used to deliver bread to the households - only half a loaf each as only one baker was still on his feet. At 44 [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] was left with two older girls and a young family of five (my [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|mother]], the youngest, was only eight years) and she borrowed £100 from her brother [[FORD, (1890) Frederick Thomas "Fred"|Fred]] to buy a house in Kaponga. However, when he came back from the war he needed the money so [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] sold the house, returned the money and moved to Dannevirke to run a boarding house. My [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|mother]] hadn't very pleasant memories of Dannevirke. Life must have been a struggle for [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]], and [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] remembered having to wear her sister's cast-off dresses which caused jeers from her school mates! Anyhow when the older girls [[FAULL, (1898) Marel Emily "Alma"|Alma]], [[FAULL, (1896) Elizabeth (Gladys)|Gladys]], [[FOREMAN, (1902) Olive Annie|Olive]] and [[FOREMAN, (1906) Helen Doreen "Nellie"|Nellie]] married [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]] sold the boarding house and moved to Wellington.

All the Foremans were excellent hockey players and chosen for their provincial teams. [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Mick]], an excellent centre half, played for Taranaki, Dannevirke, Hawke's Bay and the Bay of Plenty. [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Dorothy]] was a cracking centre forward, very determined and dashing, represented Dannevirke and was chosen to play for New Zealand on tour in South Africa, which alas, fell through for lack of funds. [[FOREMAN, (1908) Christopher Raymond "Ray"|Ray]] played for Taranaki and [[FOREMAN, (1906) Helen Doreen "Nellie"|Nellie]] for Ruahine/Dannevirke. [[FAULL, (1896) Elizabeth (Gladys)|Gladys]] was also a representative player.


[^1]: "Pat" isn't listed as a child of "Emily Ann Ford" in NZ births registry. Was "Pat" a nickname for Sarah Ann Ford?
