---
title: The Cleverley Story
draft: true
tags:
---
*Copied from the North Family Reunion Booklet (1989)*

*By Diana*

My parents were married in 1933 and lived in Glenmore Street, Wellington, not far from my grandparents, [[CLEVERLEY, Alfred Thomas|Alf]] and [[MCLEOD, Christina Isabella|Christina Cleverley]]. I was the first Cleverley grandchild so the apple of [[CLEVERLEY, Alfred Thomas|Grandpa Cleverley's]] eye. [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] was in the Police Force, one of the lucky ones to have a job in those days, though he had qualified as a boilermaker before joining the Police. [[FOREMAN, (1904) Edward Alick "Mick"|Mick]] (with [[CORNWALL, (1907) Iona (Keitha)|Keitha]] and [[FOREMAN, (1932) Lois Gay|Lois]]) had come to Wellington to look for work and used to bring his family to Glenmore Street for some nourishing Sunday dinners. With no money for bus fares, the two families use to walk for miles taking it in turn to push [[FOREMAN, (1932) Lois Gay|Lois]] and me in our pushchairs. When I was four [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] was transferred to New Plymouth and was a great asset to Taranaki as he was a rep rugby and cricket player. He and his two brothers were fine boxers and swimmers too. [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] had given up hockey but was a fine tennis player to Championship level. We lived in a large wooden house in Carrington Road and I used to walk to school. When WW2 started [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] was keen to enlist but was in a reserved occupation. Eventually he resigned from the Police Force and when he went to Trentham for Army training, [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] and I moved in with my grandparents in Wellington. [[CLEVERLEY, Alfred Thomas|Grandad Cleverley]] was the Police Sergeant at the Tinakori Road Police Station. I can well remember the scenes at the wharf when [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] left for the Middle East - it must have been a poignant time for my grandmother [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Elizabeth]], who had experienced it before. After that we rented a flat in Molesworth Street and [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma Foreman]] came to live with us because [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] went to work in the Heard Street Post Office. [[CLEVERLEY, Alfred Thomas|Grandpa Cleverley]] was not happy that I was going to the Thorndon School - it was a tough area, and eventually we moved to a State house in Khandallah. I didn't like my new school much and the wind blew incessantly. Gloom descended when my [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|father]] went missing for six months but relief all round when we heard he was P.O.W. We wouldn't have been so complacent if we'd known about his various escape attempts involving clinging to the underneath of a truck, jumping off a train and so on. I can remember [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] and I used to go once a week to pack Red Cross parcels and [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] says that but for those many of our troops would have died in the P.O.W. camps. When he returned in 1945 he rejoined the Police Force and was posted back to New Plymouth so I did my final year of primary school back at Vogeltown School, in 1946. My brother David was born in December 1946 when I was 13 1/2 years and was the cause of great jubilation. [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma Foreman]] was living with us permanently by then though she would often trip off to visit her various married sons and daughters. The family remained very close and during the War I can remember train journeys with [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma]] (and sometimes [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]]) to stay with [[FOREMAN, (1906) Helen Doreen "Nellie"|Nellie]] in Auckland, [[FAULL, (1896) Elizabeth (Gladys)|Gladys]] near Patea or [[FOREMAN, (1902) Olive Annie|Olive]] who lived in Hamilton and then Whakatane. These trips to stay with relations continued after the War also. [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma Foreman]] was still a fine looking woman, dressed always in black for mourning. My high school years at New Plymouth were very happy and I made some good friends. I did well at swimming in the Provincial Champs and joined the Fitzroy Surf Club. I went to Ardmore Teachers Training College in 1951/52 and then returned to Vogeltown School to teach. By then my parents had moved into the hotel trade and [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] was the manager of the Royal Hotel. I did my two year country service out at Warea School, a three teacher school on the Taranaki coast. The one thought on my mind was travel and so with my friend Frances Boyd we set sail for England in January 1956. [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma Foreman]], [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] and David saw me off at Wellington. The next two years were spent between teaching and travelling all over the British Isles and the Continent, those were great days. I had a few attempts at swimming the English Channel too. [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] suggested that I might give it a go while I was over there. I entered Butlins Race in 1956 but that ended as a fiasco in rough weather. Due to the conditions only nine of us out of 22 actually got into the water at Grez Nez, France and when the race was called off nine hours later Tom Parks (USA) and I were the only ones left in the water so we were awarded £500 each, half the prize money. I made two more attempts, each ending in rough water.

By the end of 1957 Frances and I had to move on or pay "Back Tax" so we flew to South Africa in January 1958. We liked the South African we'd met in our travels and weren't ready to go back to New Zealand so we took a Trek flight with stopovers at Malta, Wadi Halfa (in houseboat on the Nile), Tabora (in Tanzania) and eventually to our destination, Durban. We loved teaching there, school finished at 2pm so plenty of time to spend on the beach, but as we weren't bilingual (we couldn't speak Africaans) our pay was low, only £35 a month. We could hardly afford to live, let alone travel to see all the beauties of South Africa so we applied to teach in the Federation of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, where our pay would be double. Two guys in a sports car gave us a lift as far as Fort Victoria - quite an adventure speeding hundreds of kilometers up through Africa along strip roads, and then we took an African bus from Fort Victoria to Shabani, the asbestos mining town town to which we'd been posted. The bus stopped at almost every tree - we wondered what we'd struck after our two years in London. But we loved Shabani. Teaching was enjoyable and the Mini Club had every sporting facility. It was there that Frances met her future husband Geoff Hedges, a policeman.

Meanwhile I returned to New Zealand in 1960 due to my [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|mother's]] ill health. By Jan 1961 I was back in the Federation teaching at Redcliff School in Southern Rhodesia. I was posted to Northern Rhodesia after two years at Redcliff, and en route to to Northern Rhodesia I holidayed at Grand Beach in Nyasaland. On Christmas Day 1962 I swam across Lake Nyasa, the first person silly enough to do so. I was accompanied by boats of course and a hunter in case of crocs. The papers made great ploy of this - anyone would have thought I had leapt across the lake on crocodiles' backs - but the truth is that they only lurk around the edges, so I swam fairly fast for the first kilometre. The worst feature of the swim was sunburn! I got terribly burnt through being in the water for about nine hours. From Nyasaland I went to Mufulira in Northern Rhodesia. Had only taught there a year when the Federation broke up and Northern Rhodesia became Zambia. I continued on for another 15 months, was paid a gratuity and decided to travel through East Africa, Somalia, Aden, India, Malaysia, Thailand, Hong Kong and Australia to New Zealand. The trip left me broke but with some marvellous memories. I arrived home in time for Christmas 1965 and by then [[FORD, (1874) Elizabeth Ann|Grandma Foreman]] had died, my brother was at Police College in Trentham and [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] and [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] were living at Levin where [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] was manager of the War Veterans Home. After a great Christmas at home I sailed back to Zambia to do another 2 1/2 year contract at Ross Avenue School in Mufulira. But things were not the same under an African Government and to make matters worse I had a bad car accident and rearranged my face going through the windscreen - the door makes a much better exit. But I survived all the traumas and just before my contract ended I met Mike. However, I still flew back to New Zealand for Christmas 1968 and had a great time with my folks watching David compete at the New Zealand Water Polo & Surf Champs throughout the summer. By this time he was a fully fledged policeman and a marvellous swimmer (later he gained two New Zealand blazers - one for water polo and the other for surf life saving when he toured Australia). Meanwhile I flew back to Rhodesia and started teaching at Gatooma. Mike who was working at Mufulira Mine used to drive the hundreds of miles down from the Copper Belt in Zambia to meet me in Salisbury. In the end it seemed easier to get married which we did in April 1970 at the Hunyani Hills Hotel just out of Sky. We had a lovely home in Muf and after our delayed honeymoon in Greece, Turkey and France, Mike and I went on to England where we met up with David who'd just worked his passage over from New Zealand. My two children Christina (birth date redacted) and Conail (birth date redacted) were born in Mufulira though we made frequent visits (three in all) to New Zealand and several to England with them. By 1978 we had had enough of the shortages and general mismanagement in Zambia and the children and I flew out to England to meet up with my folks in mid 1978. They were doing their grand tour so we all met up in London with David, who by this time had a flat in London and a house in Saffron Walden in Essex (paid for through diving and modelling). Mike followed on at the end of August 1978 when his contract ended and we all holidayed at Hemsby before [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|Mum]] and [[CLEVERLEY, (1911) Gordon George|Dad]] left for New Zealand and we flew out to Rhodesia. Mike had a job at a small mine at Umvuma but he was never happy there. The people were marvellous but the job boring so we moved to Salisbury at the end of 1979. I was able to get a job teaching but Mike couldn't find a suitable job and that was the beginning of the end of our marriage which had been limping along anyway. He drifted off for a year to England, then came back for a year and so on. By this time, Rhodesia had become Zimbabwe (another black Government!) and we decided there was no future for the children. I told Mike Id'd have to move out when the children finished their primary schooling. By this time he was living in Ireland (too cold!!) and he suggested we move to New Zealand. However, when he came back to Zimbabwe in 1984 to help me pack, he said he'd not be settling in New Zealand with us. By this time, mid '84 I was Deputy Head at Lewisam School in Harare and it was a sad day for me when I had to say goodbye to an excellent job and all my wonderful friends. Sadly my [[FOREMAN, (1910) Dorothy May|mother]] had died in February 1984 so when we flew into Wellington on September 1984 it was only Dad who met us at the airport. The children and I have been in Tauranga since January 1985 - both keen on swimming, martial arts and rowing. Christina goes into the 7th form next year and Conail will be a 6th former. Alas I cannot get a teaching job but I keep busy doing remedial reading on a voluntary basis and fund raising for the children's various sports.